---
title: "Differential Equations with Matrix Theory"
siteurl:
tags: differential-equations
coursenumber: 333
shortsemester: 2022A
semester: Spring
year: 2022
layout: mycourse
syllabus_pdf:
syllabus_html:
syllabus_standalone_html:
catalog: >
  *Catalog description*:
  Use of differential equations to model phenomena in sciences and engineering.
  Solution of differential equations via analytic, qualitative and numerical techniques.
  Linear and nonlinear systems of differential equations.
  Introduction to matrix algebra, determinants, eigenvalues, and solutions of linear systems.
  Laplace transforms.

---


# Math 333, Spring 2022 Syllabus
{:.no_toc}

1. TOC
{:toc}


## Course Information
{:style="color: #ffffff; background-color: #236fa1; font-size: 36pt; padding: 15px;"}

**Course Number**:
: Math 333

**Course Title**:
: Differential Equations With Matrix Theory

**Catalog Statement**:
: Use of differential equations to model phenomena in sciences and engineering.
  Solution of differential equations via analytic, qualitative and numerical techniques.
  Linear and nonlinear systems of differential equations.
  Introduction to matrix algebra, determinants, eigenvalues, and solutions of linear systems.
  Laplace transforms.


**Prerequisites**:
: MATH 175


### Instructor

**Instructor**:
: Zach Teitler [he/him/his]

**Email**:
: <zteitler@boisestate.edu>

**Website**:
: <https://zteitler.github.io>

**Office**:
: MB 233A

**Office Phone**:
: 208-426-1086


### Section

**Section Number**:
: 003

**Meeting Times**:
: MoWeFr 10:30 AM - 11:45 AM

**Meeting Remotely**:
: We will meet remotely using Zoom.
  Zoom sessions may be recorded for students who are not able to attend.

{% comment %}
**Zoom meeting ID**:
: <https://boisestate.zoom.us/j/95436121675>
{% endcomment %}


## Course Learning Outcomes
{:style="color: #ffffff; background-color: #236fa1; font-size: 36pt; padding: 15px;"}

By the end of this course, students will be able to:

1.  Communicate about differential equations using correct vocabulary, notation,
    concepts, and logic.

2.  Solve a variety of first order ODEs using methods such as separation of variables,
    integration factors, or exact equations.

3.  Analyze behavior of solutions to first order ODEs by looking at slope fields
    and equilibrium solutions.
    
4.  Perform basic matrix algebra including addition,
    scalar multiplication, matrix multiplication, elementary row operations,
    determinants, linear independence of rows/columns, and finding eigenvalues
    and eigenvectors.

5.  Solve linear systems of first order ODEs using the eigenvalue/eigenvector method.

6.  Solve both homogeneous and nonhomogeneous linear second order ODEs
    with constant coefficients.

7.  Solve initial value problems using the Laplace transform method.

8.  Set up, solve, and analyze differential equations in application settings from
    physics/engineering/science.



## Course Text
{:style="color: #ffffff; background-color: #236fa1; font-size: 36pt; padding: 15px;"}

### Primary Text

Our primary course text will be course notes and daily lessons by Jaimos Skriletz:

+ <https://calculus.boisestate.edu/22spring333/lessons.html>

A notable feature of these notes is the early emphasis on *systems of equations*.
The notes are freely available at the above webpage.
You do not have to purchase any text for this class.

### Optional Texts

The following texts may serve as optional additional references
which are close to the course notes:

+ [The Ordinary Differential Equations Project](http://faculty.sfasu.edu/judsontw/ode/) by Thomas Judson.

+ [Notes on Diffy Qs: Differential Equations for Engineers](https://www.jirka.org/diffyqs/) by Jiří Lebl.
  This is a two-semester text, so it has several extra topics and gets more technical
  than the Judson or Skriletz texts.

## Exam Dates
{:style="color: #ffffff; background-color: #236fa1; font-size: 36pt; padding: 15px;"}

There will be two midterm exams and a final exam. The exam dates are:

+ Exam 1: Wednesday, February 23rd.
+ Exam 2: Monday, April 4th.
+ Final Exam: Wednesday, May 4, 12:00-2:00 PM.

Failure to take either midterm exam or the final exam
will constitute a failing grade in the course.

## Grading
{:style="color: #ffffff; background-color: #236fa1; font-size: 36pt; padding: 15px;"}

### Components of course grade

Course grades will be based on a combination of
online (computer graded) homework,
quizzes, and exams.

+ WeBWorK Assignments (35%): Daily homework problems completed in WeBWorK.
+ Quizzes (15%): Most weeks (except exam weeks) will have a take-home or class-time quiz.
+ Exams (50%): The two midterm exams are worth 15% each and the final exam is worth 20%,
  for a total of 50%.

### Grade scale

Your grade (unless you skip any exam) is computed on a straight scale:

| **Percent** | **Grade**  |
| :---------: | :--------: |
| 90-100%     | A (+/-)    |
| 80-89%      | B (+/-)    |
| 70-79%      | C (+/-)    |
| 60-69%      | D (+/-)    |
| 0-59%       | F          |

Under exceptional circumstances this scale might be curved slightly up (in your favor).
It will never be curved down.
Plus/minus grades might be used if your final grade falls near the top or bottom
of a grade range.




### Attendance

Class attendance is required:

+ during the first week of the semester
+ for the first two quizzes
+ for all exams

After the first week, apart from the first two quizzes and the exams,
class attendance will be optional, not required, and not graded.

Class attendance is *highly recommended*. Attending class has many benefits such as:

+ Opportunities to ask questions, get immediate feedback, and ask followup questions

+ Build community with other students (including forming study groups)

+ Establish a relationship with the instructor: get to know me and let me get to know you,
  in case you decide to look for research opportunities or a letter of recommendation


### Turning in written assignments

Quizzes and exams will include a written portion.
For these items, submissions and grading will be paperless.
You will turn in the written portions of quizzes and exams
by uploading PDFs to Gradescope.



### Makeup Policy

+ If you are feeling ill do not come to class.
+ There is no attendance or participation grade in this class.
+ All daily lessons can be completed on your own time with help from the class resources
  and your instructor.
+ If you need to miss a quiz or exam, contact your instructor prior to the due date
  to make arrangements to make up the assignment.

The makeup policy depends on the assignment type:

#### WeBWorK Assignments Makeup Policy

Daily WeBWorK assignments have two due dates:

+ The first due date is the reduced scoring date.
  
  + Problems completed before this date earn full credit.
  + Problems completed after the reduced scoring date (but before the close date) will earn 75% of their points.
  + The reduced scoring date is at 11:59pm one class day after the lesson is covered in class.
  
+ The second due date is the close date.
  
  + Problems cannot be completed for credit after this date.
  + There is a close date the day before each exam.
  + Exam 1 assignments close Tuesday, February 22nd at 11:59pm.
  + Exam 2 assignments close Sunday, April 3rd at 11:59pm.
  + Final assignments close Sunday, May 1st at 11:59pm.

+ There are no makeups for WeBWorK assignments.
  Pay close attention to the reduced scoring and close dates of assignments.

#### Quizzes and Exams Makeup Policy

If you are ill or have another excused reason to miss a quiz or exam you must:

+ Contact your instructor **prior to** the quiz/exam date,
  or **within 24 hours** afterward in case of an emergency
+ Explain your situation as to why you are not able to take the quiz/exam.
+ Provide any preferred dates/times to make up the quiz/exam.
+ Make arrangements on when and how to make up the quiz/exam.

+ If you miss a quiz, you will **receive a zero** on that quiz.
+ If you miss an exam, you will **fail the course**.




## Shared Course Materials
{:style="color: #ffffff; background-color: #236fa1; font-size: 36pt; padding: 15px;"}

Some materials for this course are shared with other sections of Math 333,
including daily lessons, worksheets, most homework, and the course calendar
including due dates of quizzes and exams.

However this section will have its own quizzes and exams,
including separate directions for how to complete and turn in the quizzes and exams.
Do not follow quiz/exam directions posted for other sections of Math 333.


## Help
{:style="color: #ffffff; background-color: #236fa1; font-size: 36pt; padding: 15px;"}


### Student times

I am here to support your learning.
I encourage you to meet with me when you feel that you need support or assistance.

**Student drop-in time:**
: Tuesdays 10:30am-11:45am

**Student appointment time:**
: Tuesdays 1:30pm-2:45pm
: Make an appointment by emailing me or using appointment link within Canvas

**Additional appointments:**
: Email me to set up an appointment on other days or times

Student times will be remote via Zoom
using my **office zoom link** (listed in Canvas, or email me for the link).

### Collaboration

You are *encouraged* to work together with other students
on studying, the worksheets, and the homework assignments.
This can include students from other sections of Math 333.

However you are *not allowed* to work with other students
on quizzes or exams.
Working with other students on quizzes or exams without permission
is an extremely serious form of academic misconduct.
In this class, students do not have permission to work together
on quizzes or exams.

### University Resources

Boise State University's [The Basics](https://www.boisestate.edu/student-life/basics/)
web page has links to many forms of support,
ranging from academic resources to family, living, and food resources.



### Additional Help

You may reach out to me at any time if there's anything I can help with
or if there's anything you think I should know.



## Important Dates
{:style="color: #ffffff; background-color: #236fa1; font-size: 36pt; padding: 15px;"}

| Monday    | 1/10 | First day of classes | 
| Monday    | 1/17 | Dr. Martin Luther King Jr./Idaho Human Rights Day. No classes. |
| Monday    | 1/24 | Last day to register/add or to drop without a W |
| Monday    | 2/21 | Presidents' Day. No classes. |
| Wednesday | 2/23 | Exam 1. Attendance required. |
| Friday    | 3/18 | Last day to drop with a W or completely withdraw |
|           | 3/21-25 | Spring Break. No classes. |
| Monday    | 4/4  | Exam 2. Attendance required. |
| Friday    | 4/29 | Last day of instruction for regular classes |
| Wednesday | 5/4  | Final Exam, 12:00 p.m.-2:00 p.m. |
| Tuesday   | 5/10 | Grades due. (You will be able to see your grade by this date.) |




## Other
{:style="color: #ffffff; background-color: #236fa1; font-size: 36pt; padding: 15px;"}

**Respect for Diversity**:
: Students from all backgrounds and with all perspectives are welcome in this course.
  It is my intent that all students be well served by this course,
  that students's learning needs be addressed both in and out of class,
  and that the diversity that students bring to this class be viewed as a resource,
  strength, and benefit.
  It is my intent to maintain a classroom atmosphere that is welcoming and respectful
  of diversity: gender, sexuality, disability, age, socioeconomic status, ethnicity,
  race, and culture.
  Your suggestions are encouraged and appreciated.
  Please let me know ways to improve the effectiveness of the course for you personally
  or for other students or student groups.

**Mathematics Department Inclusivity Statement**:
: The Boise State Mathematics Department is committed to supporting persons
  of diverse backgrounds in an inclusive environment.
  Read more in the [Inclusivity Statement](https://www.boisestate.edu/math/inclusivity-statement/).

**ADA Policy Statement**:
: Students with disabilities needing accommodations to fully participate in this class
  should contact the EAC.
  All accommodations must be approved through the EAC prior to being implemented.
  To learn more about the accommodation process, visit the EAC's website at
  <https://www.boisestate.edu/eac/new-students/>.

**Email**:
: In accordance with
  [Boise State University Policy #2280](https://boisestate.edu/policy/policy-title-student-e-mail-communications/),
  it is expected that you will receive and read emails sent to your `boisestate.edu`
  email address.

**Communication**:
: Additional information and updates may be announced in class, sent by email,
  and/or posted on Canvas (<https://canvas.boisestate.edu/>).

**Academic Integrity**:
: Getting answers to homework, quiz, or exam problems from unauthorized sources
  is a very serious form of academic misconduct.

**Behavioral Expectations**:
: Every student has the right to a respectful learning environment.
  In order to provide this right to all students, students must take
  individual responsibility to conduct themselves in a mature and appropriate manner
  and will be held accountable for their behavior in accordance with
  [Boise State University Policy #2050](https://boisestate.edu/policy/student-affairs/maintaining-order/).



